I would like to begin this interview by saying that
my name is Charles Weiss and that I am interviewing
my grandfather, Mr. John Addicks, who is
currently living in the Salem community, which is
located on Route 3, Brenham, Texas. This
interview is being conducted at his home on July
30, 1976, and the time is 7.45 p.m.
Okay, Grandpa, are you ready? Yes. Okay. First,
I'd like you to give me a little information as to
where you were born, in what, and in what year.
I was born on August the 22nd, 1891, at Warrington,
Fett County, Texas. Were you born in your house?
And if so, did the doctor come to your house? Yes. He
did come to your house? Yes. Okay. Just how long ago
did your family come to that area? I'm referring to
your mom and dad. It must have been about
ten years or so. I see. Do you know why they decided
to come to that area?
Times were too difficult in Germany. Oh, I see.
They were from Germany then. Yes. I see. Are there a
lot of German people in that area? Yes, nothing but
Germans. Oh, I see. Do you have any brothers or
sisters?
I have no brother, but I have one sister. She's
dead, too. I see. Did you start school in
Warrington or in Round Top? I started school at
Rocky Hill, Texas. Rocky Hill, Texas. Just where
is that? Oh, that's the country school right close
to Warrington. Okay. Just how did you get to
school? Walked it. How far did you live from the
schoolhouse? Oh, I guess about a mile and a half,
two miles. Did you have any other means of
transportation, such as when it was raining or
anything of that sort? No, we had to walk. I see. Can
you tell me something about the schoolhouse, such
as was it a one-room schoolhouse, or how many
teachers were there? Something to do with that
line. It was a one-room schoolhouse, wooden, not
sealed. Taught, I believe, four readers, not
grades at that time. Four readers? Yes. What do you
mean exactly by readers? Well, readers, we call it
grades now. In those days, we called those
Readers. First reader, second reader, third
reader, fourth reader. So in a sense there was one
teacher to four readers. Yeah. I see.
Back then, what kind of activities did you do in
your leisure time, such as when you were young?
What kind of activities did you do? Like now we go
out for ball games, to see ball games, to watch
football games. We have TV now, which you didn't
have back then. Just what exactly did y'all do?
Oh, chiefly hunting. Uh-huh. And not too often
either. Uh-huh. Fishing once in a while. I see.
What about maybe something like picnics on
Sundays and things of that nature? We didn't have
any picnics. I see. What did y'all do on holidays,
such as Easter and Thanksgiving, Christmas,
Fourth of July? We didn't do anything. Sometimes
we worked. I see. Did you have any... Well,
whatever celebrations you had, it was carried on
in the house. That's right. I see. Back then, do you
remember any fads or any fashions that were kind of
popular for that time?
The boys had to wear knee pants.
Anything else, I don't know. Okay. How about
dances? Were they popular back then? That's the
only entertainment we had. I see. Dances. Okay.
Could you tell me a little bit about the first job
you had and maybe what kind of pay that it had? The
first job was teaching at Wellcome. Wellcome of
Austin County. I received $45 a month and had to pay
$15 for a board. So I had $30 left. That's not very
much now compared to what we have now. I forgot to
ask you back, where did you graduate from school to
get your teaching degree?
I got my certificate at Blaine College for taking
the examination, the state examination. That was
in 1960, I think, on April 8th and 9th, if I remember
right, in 1916. 1916, I see. Just how long were you a
teacher in the public schools? At that place? One
year only. Then I was drafted to the United States
Army, Army of Occupation. How many years did you
serve in the Army? I served about 22 months.
You went overseas? Yes, sir. I see. Spent about one
month, I mean about one year overseas. Uh-huh.
When you came back from the Army, did you take up
teaching again? Yes, sir. And you taught where? I
taught at Salem, Washington County. For how many
years? I taught 44 years. I see. 44 years. Then I got
two years credit for military service. Makes 46
years. That's a long time. Just when did you get
married?
That was 1922. 1923. Okay. Got married. And just
where was she from? From Wonder Hill, Washington
County. Small community. I see. And just what
exactly was your reason for moving here? The
teaching job? What was your reason for moving to
where you presently are staying now? Was it your
job? It was the biggest school. I see. And I had the
principal's job over here. Oh.
Just what kind of work did your... You said you had a
sister. Just what kind of work did she do, or where
did she move to when she was married? She stayed...
at Warrington, Texas all of my life. Farmer's
wife. Okay.
What other kind of work did you do besides
teaching? Did you raise cattle or what other kind
of farm? I raised some cattle.
Did you raise anything like cotton or corn? Yes. I
think all my life I raised one bale of cotton. I see.
Just how big was your farm? We had 150 acres at last.
I see. But now we have 72 acres left.
Did you grow most of what you needed or did you buy
quite a bit from town? I think we bought quite a
number of things from town.
Tell me something about the Depression. How did it
affect you and others around you?
Depression started in 1929.
We thought it would be over in just a few months, but
it lasted a long time. I think it wasn't over in
1939.
Did you feel any real hard effects from it, such as
where you—I
don't know how to say it—did you feel that there was
a shortage of food or a shortage of a lot of things
around here? Well, not exactly around here. You
see, we lived on the farm, and we didn't notice it so
much. But in larger cities, they had quite a bit of
trouble. I see.
Since you mentioned that you were a teacher, how do
you think that the conditions have changed since
the time that you've gone to school or since the
time that you were teaching school, more so than
the size of the school? Maybe tell me a little bit
about how you think maybe the... Well, in 1939,
I think it was in 1930, no, 1919, when I started
teaching, we had 39 common school districts in the
county. Now we have two school districts left, and
both were independent school districts. They all
have been consolidated.
Uh-huh. When you taught school, how many teachers
were teaching in that particular country school,
and how many grades did each one teach? We had Salem
and Pleasant Hill, we had four. We started out with
two, and later on we increased it to four. Four
teachers? Yes, four teachers. I see. And each one
had how many grades? They taught maybe two grades
for each teacher on the hour? Yes. First we had to
teach four grades, and then later on taught under
two grades. I see.
I remember having to go to... when we went out from
Pleasant Hill the last few years that it operated,
and I think I had, was note, remembered that it was
two grades to each teacher, mainly also.
Do you travel very much, or did you used to travel
very much? No, not so much, not anyhow. Maybe
to other towns when you did, nearby towns? Yes, we
did that all right. Go to neighboring towns. For
maybe just to visit? Yes, just to visit. I see. I
guess Houston has always been a pretty big town
around here. Yes.
Have you ever been out of Texas besides for the war?
And for what reason did you go? No,
sir. Never was out of Texas. I always stayed in
Texas. That's
Shreveport. It was just a little bit, too.
Do you have any children? Yeah, two. Two? Could you
tell me where they have moved to and what's the type
of work that they are doing now?
Well, we have a boy and a girl.
And a girl works in a tax office. Uh-huh. Here in
Brenham? Yes. And the boy works in Houston as a
certified public accountant.
They were raised up here in this area right here?
Yes, they were raised here. Okay.
Backing up to what we were talking about, the war
and its effect, on the United States. Do you recall
anything that
people usually tried to do to contribute to the war
effort? Like I know of in larger cities or so that
they went to the factories and helped increase
factories. Well, they bought war bonds. War
bonds? Yes. Could you tell me a little bit about
these war bonds? Why they were created? What way
they helped? That's directly to the government.
The government needed money, and they gave them
the bonds for it. Do you have any war bonds with you?
No, we don't have any left. But you did have some?
Yes. When you bought these bonds for a certain
amount of money, they reimbursed you the same
amount of money? Yes.
Do you recall anything unusual about any of the
presidential campaigns or elections besides the
ones we've had here recently, such as the
Watergate scandal and...
Anything to that nature? No, I don't remember
anything in particular.
Except President Wilson made a promise that I'd
keep you out of the war, World War I. Just as soon as
he was elected, he was for it. I see. Do you remember
any particular disasters or floods or tornadoes
that's happened in this area or any surrounding
area? Well, we had a storm at Galveston. We had a
hailstorm in 1950. It was in 1960, 1950.
They were pretty bad. Do you remember a lot about
Galveston, the storm there in, you said 1900?
1900? Yes. It killed about 6,000 people, I think. I
see. This hail storm that you mentioned in 1950,
just exactly what it was, that was just a little bit
before my time. Did that happen in this area? That
happened exactly in our community. We had to put a
new roof on our house. I see. It must have been
pretty bad then. Do you remember a lot about
Hurricane Carla? I know that was in 1962, I guess,
somewhere back then. I remember a little bit about
that. I guess that's no comparison to the other
two. No.
Do you ever remember having any problems among
students in class? I mean, in controlling them or
anything related to that idea? Never. Problems.
However, we had them off and on, though,
especially when the parents took up for the
children. I see.
Can you tell me something about integration? When
did it come in, and what promoted it to come in?
Well, it was brought on by the federal government.
We were forced to integrate. That happened here
about seven, eight years ago, I think. You never
witnessed any of it when you were teaching then?
No, sir. That was after my time. Uh-huh. Do you
remember any type of racial problems? Did we have
any racial problems in this area, do you think? The
integration first came in. I don't think we did.
There was hardly any opposition then to it. No. I
think that took place when I was about in the sixth
grade, and it really didn't take over until when I
was a freshman, I believe. So I never witnessed
anything either.
Just what type of people are living in this area
now? I mean, are they of German descent or any other
type of... Chief of German descent. Uh-huh. And
what type of work do they do? Are there large farms
or do they have other type of jobs? Well, in 1919,
all of the people worked on the farms to raise corn
and cotton. No one had jobs in town, but now
everyone has a job in town. Not only one, but the
whole family. And no cutting is raised anymore,
and no corn. That's changed entirely. Then mostly
the type of farms that are around here are for
cattle raising? Yes, cattle raising.
Just what kind of technological changes have you
seen in farming in the last few years or in the last
decade or so?
I don't know. I've seen too many. I mean, back when
you raised cotton and everything, pretty well
everything was done by...
Walking cultivators. Now they have tractors.
Everyone has tractors on the farm. Have you
noticed anything else significantly besides
that there are no crops being raised anymore and
types of equipment? No, not exactly.
People can't afford to own land anymore. It's too
expensive. Do you think a lot of people are doing
this cattle raising as a side business, that they
have other jobs connected with it, or do you think
that it's mainly their one occupation in this
area? It's not their chief occupation. They do
that besides the jobs they have in town.
Do you think that this area is getting larger? And
what I'm referring to in this area is Brenham. Have
you noticed a great change in size in the last few
years? Yes, I think so. It's getting larger. Just
what type of... Do you think businesses account
for this growth, or just what exactly do you think
is a major cause for all these people coming here
and staying more now so than what they did before? I
think they have more factories in Brenham. Such
as? Cotton factory, mattress factory.
And there are quite a number of others. These
weren't here 20 years ago? The cotton factory was
here a long time ago.
But as far as Sealy Mattress, they haven't been
here as long. No. I see.
Just what type of changes have you noticed in the
landscape? like roads and buildings. Have you
noticed quite a bit of changing taking place in
this area? Well, out of the country, we haven't
made many changes. We still have dirt roads.
I guess you've seen a lot of changes on the
highways. Oh yes, the highways are fixed up. Were
there any major highways? say 25 years ago around
here? 25, I believe the first one
was the highway that runs from Burton to Chapel
Hill. That was the first highway built in the
county. But I don't know exactly when it was built.
And later on Highway 36. Then it made Fountain
Market Roads. They weren't made before the
highways then. They were put in... No, a little bit
later on. I see.
Do you notice any real big changes in the way kids
are raised now as compared to when they were young?
Or maybe to the way you raised your children? Oh
yes, quite a bit of difference. In what way? They
sent them to school much longer nowadays. They had
to go nine months. In those days, some went six
months, some seven, and then they had to stay at
home and work on the farms. So they were let out then
early in spring. That's right.
I guess you notice there's a lot of difference in
the way they go to school now also. Oh yes, that's
right. Pretty well, everyone walked to school. In
those days, everybody had to walk.
I imagine when you were young that,
well, What you listened to mainly was programs on
the radio. Do you remember any special programs
back then that you always listened to? I don't
think we had any radios.
I don't think I remember that we had any. When do you
think they first came? Radios came later on first.
Do you have any particular idea that you can... as
to what date that you can associate with it, maybe,
that you first noticed? We didn't have anything to
listen to. Uh-huh. And radios haven't been here no
more than about 30 or 40 years. Yeah, that's right.
How long was it before you got your first TV? Do you
remember?
Oh, that's... Pretty good while ago, I know. Say
maybe 20 years or 30 years? I believe every bit of
it, if not longer. Did many people have one when
they first came out, or was it just the wealthier
people that had them that was more available? I
guess the wealthier were the first ones to get
some, but after a while all the people bought them.